When I first heard it the Monty Hall problem sounded overly complicated. Initially I assumed that I could play through the game a few times and see how many times I won depending on the choices the player and Monty can make. But such a brute force method wasn’t appealing. If I want the correct answer using that method I need to go through all possible iterations of the game which is not very efficient. 


But there is one observation that I can make. If I can properly state the confines of the game and thus specify the data clearly I might not have to go through every single iteration of the game. If I assume a player picks door A and go through all valid iterations from that starting point, the game is then degenerate in a sense; it won’t matter which door the player chooses because I have specified all the different ways the game can progress and those possibilities are true no matter what. They only differ in the numbering of the doors. 


1. So let’s assume the player picks door A…(And Monty will never open the door with the car!)


1. The car can be behind door A, B or C. 


1. If the player has picked door A and the car is behind door A, the player will lose if they switch and win if they don’t. For this instance Switching is a bad option.


1. If the car is behind door B and the play has still chosen Door A, then Monty is forced to open door C which has nothing. The player will win if they switch but lose if they don’t. Here switching is the best option.


1. If the car is behind door C and the player has chosen door A, a similar situation occurs, Monty again is forced to open door B and the player is in a similar situation to before where switching is the best option. 


1. As mentioned before if we view the analysis from the starting point of a different door, the dynamics of the game will still be the same  and we would end up with a similar situation where switching led to a win ⅔ of the time. I can then conclude that switching is a better strategy when playing this game with Monty.